feminist women out there are not going
to like this women are perishing in this
modern world more than men well that's
terrifying if we want to exist on this
planet we're going to have to do Dr
Mindy Pelt renowned functional health
expert bestselling author and keynote
speaker one of the leading voices in
educating us about our bodies spending
two decades helping Millions worldwide
you got pretty famous from talking about
this certain subject matter which is
fasting what do I need to know research
shows it's going to make me stronger
more lean
1,300% increase in testosterone in men
oh wow we see inflammation go down
growth hormone go up it's the hormone
that keeps you young and helps you burn
fat you know where it dropped the most
amount of weight belly yep literally
takes cells that are turning into cancer
and it gets rid of those you are tapping
into a healing state that you never knew
was there I'm sold where do I stop so
the first place to start is menstration
or the Big M is considered a taboo topic
I'm going to say something which is
really embarrassing here I know nothing
about menstrual cycles I'm in a
relationship what advice have you got
for me well the first is do you know her
cycle moving on tell me about your
childhood let me give you gold first two
days give her some space if you have any
conflict you want to resolve with her do
it between Day 2 and day 12 her libido
is going to be the highest between day
10 and day 15 and then here's the goal
you're going to have to report back to
me how this works around day 17 this is
where you got
to once in a while on this podcast I
have a conversation that I desperately
wish I'd had sooner this is one of those
conversations I'd heard about fasting
but I had no idea no idea at all of its
potentially lifechanging impact weight
loss your sex life A woman's menstrual
cycle how to heal from illness and
injury the incredible power of fasting
I'm incredibly happy that you chose to
listen to this particular conversation
because if you're like me and you've
never really taken the time to
understand fasting and you don't
understand the six types of fasting then
maybe this is the conversation you've
always needed to hear because it
certainly was for me you are really
really going to enjoy this one take my
word for
[Music]
it
Mindy if you took the full body of work
that you've produced over the last let's
say 10 years and the work that you're
going to produce over the next 10 years
and you had to
summarize the mission that you're on and
why it
matters how would you do that wow that's
a great question um I'm trying to
empower people to believe in themselves
again and I want to do that through
everything that in our lifestyle that
Taps into our body's own ability to heal
itself we' have gotten so far far off
course we don't even realize that we're
giving so much of our health power away
our happiness power away and all we've
got to do is come back home to ourselves
and learn that every single thing inside
of us every cell every neuron everything
is working for us not against us and we
have to stop villainizing our body we
got to figure out how to believe in
ourselves again we're the ones that are
going to save ourselves and we've just
lost our way what have we fallen into
the Trap of believing well in the health
World we've totally fallen into the Trap
that if I take this pill if I do this
diet if I do this exercise then that
will cure me nobody cures you you cure
yourself and so you have to start to
look at the human body as this
self-healing organism that's always
figuring out how to keep you alive how
to keep you at your best and if you're
not feeling at your best then the only
thing you to look at is that there's an
interference there's physical emotional
spiritual chemical interference that is
pulling you away from this power that's
inside of you so that you can start to
heal Once you pull those away you see
yourself in a whole new light I mean
this is what fasting did for millions of
people you just see yourself so
differently in what you're capable of
doing where where have we gone wrong in
terms of our attitude towards what it is
to be a human because you know I often
think much of the health advice that we
is through thrown at us these days has
this underlying belief that like in some
way we're broken yeah yeah yeah oh my I
I so agree with you it's the messaging
is like you did something wrong you have
a genetic profile that you're doomed to
to have a you know a disastrous outcome
and everything is is is exogenously
blamed at us and I really think that
that comes from not only our Health Care
system and I and I'm not trying to bash
the healthare system but we have lost
our way and it comes from for women
specifically it comes from the messaging
we get from you know social media and
magazines like everything is outside in
we got to go inside out now and start
asking what we want on a physical
spiritual emotional level so that we can
create the life we want and stop looking
outside for the answers we got to go
within I love that inside inside out the
inside out inside out living you got
pretty famous from talking about this
certain subject matter which is fasting
yeah now I want to talk about fasting
because I've heard about it and I I I'm
sure here I represent a lot of my
audience right now I've heard the term
fasting I've heard loads of people in
recent times over the last I'd say two
years get really excited about it and
say that it's a good thing yeah but
that's really the extent of my knowledge
on the subject so let's just start right
there I mean you wrote a book called
fast like a girl you've got so much
content out on the internet about
fasting for both men and women this book
was written in
2022 why why why are you so focused on
fasting why do I need to care about it
what's it going to do for me it it's the
quickest antidote to what we just said
if we've got all this physical emotional
chemical stress coming at us we've got
taste buds we've got to change we've got
behaviors we have to change there's a
lot there but I can show you how to
compress your eating window into a
10-hour eating window leaving 14 hours
for fasting something as simple as 14
hours and I can show you how you can
start to heal yourself without money
without time it's you are literally
tapping into a healing state that you
never knew was there and I think part of
why we've had so many people pour on to
YouTube and so many women gravitate to
the book is that it's it's so once you
learn how to fast you start to see your
body in this whole new way it can Absol
absolutely heal itself so for me fasting
became this incredible tool that
everybody could do and we just had to
learn how to do it the women that I'm
watching that are just dropping I mean
men and women hundreds of pounds and
medications they're getting off of and
mental health that's coming back just
because I taught them how to compress
their eating window and leave a longer
time for rest so their body can repair
that is all each individual is doing
that I didn't do that I'm the type of
person that very much needs
like stats believe things I'm one of
those people and once I've got the stats
or some kind of like scientific evidence
then I'm all in beautiful what do I need
to know from a scientific standpoint
what research has been done on fasting
okay so let's let's go through the basic
principle of fasting and I think this
will help everybody is that you have two
metabolisms so you burn energy when you
eat
and you burn energy when you don't eat
but there are two different
mechanisms so when you eat like let's
use myself as an example I had eggs and
some avocado for like around 11 o'clock
today so that's going to bring my blood
sugar up now as my blood sugar starts to
drop what's going to happen is my body's
going to switch over into this other
Energy System and I call this the fat
burning Energy System I call this one
the sugar burner Energy System when it
switch over into this fat burning Energy
System it starts to make a byproduct
called a ketone and that Ketone will go
up into the brain and it starts to
repair your brain and what most people
don't realize is your brain is needs 50%
ketones 50% glucose so you're giving a
fuel source to your brain that it
desperately needs which is why people
when they fast are like their mental
Clarity goes up their cognition improves
their brain fog goes away because
because you're literally giving a fuel
source to your brain that it may never
had have been given before it takes
about eight somewhere between eight
hours to metabolically switch over into
this fat burning Place ah okay so if I'm
doing a podcast and I want to be sharp
yes I shouldn't eat eight hours before
yes ah
[__] did you come back in seven
hours seven
hours yeah
sure should have given you the memo
before we got
here yeah so I think of it like a hybrid
car you know you you're SW you switch
over into this fat burning place so at
eight hours you start to make the switch
by about 12 hours your body's now
starting to make a good dose of ketones
the brain is excited so you're getting
that mental Clarity ketones turn off the
hunger hormone so you also when you
switch over at there's going to be a
point which you're not hungry um and
that all happens at about 12 hours but
you're also if you stay there a little
longer if you stay there and you go 14
hours 15 hours so check this out
research shows at 15 hours we see growth
hormone go up okay growth hormone is the
hormone that keeps you young and helps
you burn fat we also see in men,
1300% increase in testosterone just from
somewhere between a 13 to 15 hour fast
133% increase in natural testost Stone
stores and we can explain why that
happens in a moment and then we start to
see inflammation go down so all of a
sudden if you have people who have like
joints that are hurting they start doing
15 hours of fasting every day and
they're like God you know my joints just
don't have that same stiffness in them
anymore but if you stay in that fasted
window you keep going 17 hours your
brilliant body turns within and it goes
wait a second no food's coming in we
better get stronger so it literally
takes this the bad cells the cells that
are slowing you down the cells that are
turning into cancer and it gets rid of
those they're called ccent cells and it
it literally recycles them out of your
system and it goes into the cells that
are still usable and it makes them
stronger it fixes the inner Cellular
Parts we call that autophagy and that
actually was the if you want stats the
Nobel Prize in 2015 by a Japanese
scientist Dr osumi he won the Nobel
Prize medicine and Physiology for this
term called autophagy and that's when
you go without food your cell your cells
will heal
themselves that was back in
2015 so I want to go into all of that I
want to start with why why does why does
fasting help so much and really like
what I'm getting at there is if
this if the effects of this are so
profound in so many ways then where did
we go wrong because from what I you know
have been told breakfast lunch dinner
yeah breakfast lunch dinner and then
maybe you know dessert yeah and then you
know yeah that's the narrative that I
was brought up on yeah well breakfast is
the most important meal a day I've done
a lot of research on that phrase do you
know where it came from no it was
actually and I don't mean to diss any
companies out there but it was a tagline
that they came up with for cornflakes
for Kellogg's cornflakes back in the
1970s they needed a tagline that made
people eat corn flakes in in the morning
and so they came up with cornflakes
breakfast is the most important meal of
the day and that has continued until
this day we I can't find any research
and and many other fasting experts many
other blood sugar experts will tell you
the same thing there's just no research
showing that breakfast is the most
important meal of the day so that became
that became a a a myth that we need to
bust second myth we've been taught is
you can speed your metabolism up the
more you eat six meals a day remember
that one okay also a myth there is no
evidence that the more you eat the
faster your metabolism will be the F if
you want a faster metabolism you need to
know how to metabolically switch you
need to know how to go from sugar burner
to fat burner and that's where you start
to lose weight so that's the SEC the the
other myth that I feel like we have to
break apart and then we have this you
know I can tell you as a mother and I
and this is you know not for anybody to
have M mommy guilt but what we do as
parents is we have certain statements we
make to our kids like you know breakf
dinner's being served the kitchen's
closing in an hour um you need to eat
lunch you need to eat breakfast like we
are programmed when to eat by a clock
not by our own internal sense so kids
are raised to eat according to a clock
not according to when they want to
eat we don't say am I hungry right
now that's so true we all wait until 1:
p.m. to have lunch and the morning we
wake up we feel like we we have to have
breakfast or we're doing something wrong
yep and then dinner time you know
anytime between I don't know 6:00 and
eight we have to sit down and eat again
or we're doing something wrong yep like
have you like if you just unwind that
yeah where did that come from right
usually from your parents and it came
from a schedule what did my ancestors do
before my parents existed and and my and
the schedules existed I can tell you
exactly what they did what did they do
they came out of the cave I'm going to
go back to our our Primal friends go
back to our cave friends they came out
of a cave they didn't have refrigerator
they didn't have a pantry they didn't
have door Dash they had to go find food
did they have Uber Eats they didn't have
Uber Eats delivery yeah I'm pretty sure
they didn't have U eats but what they
did is they came out of the cave and
they went to go hunt hunt
food sometimes they could make a kill
really easily and bring it home and they
would
Feast sometimes the kill wasn't as easy
and they had to go far to find an animal
to kill
exercise exercise but what did they do
when they had to go super far and they
couldn't get food they switched over
into this ketogenic Energy System and
that ketogenic Energy System supercharg
them because every cell in the human
body is the number one priority of our
cells is survival so we were built to
make sure we could stay alive in the
absence of food so their ketones kicked
in and when ketones kicked in they
became mentally very focused so they
could go find food they were able to
stay calm ketones will affect a
neurotransmitter called Gaba and cause G
Gaba to come on so you feel calm you're
focused ketones will power up your
muscles so that all of a sudden you have
this incredible muscular energy all
because
they were meant to go find food so they
can bring it home okay so the body which
is orientated towards survival when you
hadn't eaten it invests a lot of its
sort of resources in your brain to
increase the chances that you'll catch
something to eat so that's why when I
fast or when I haven't eaten I'm very
focused I'm very articulate that's right
it seems um and I perform at my best
Bingo that's it makes sense and then
what what did they do when they got a
kill they came home and they feasted
they didn't necessarily ration it out
they ate and then they divied it up
again amongst the tribe and then they
went out again until when the food was
gone maybe a couple days maybe they'd
Feast for a couple days when the food
was gone they go out again it's called
Feast famine cycling it is how humans
were meant to be to live the challenge
we have is we have access to food all
the time that we are you know feasting
has taken on a really negative
connotation because we're feasting on
the wrong Foods M but if we could go
back and just be like our Primal friends
and we could learn how to go in and out
of this Feast famine cycling using
fasting as as a tool for performance for
healing and using food in the proper way
and eating the right food so that our
brains will work well and you know
there's a whole hormonal pack or sense
of of food that can help support
hormones if we're really conscious about
the quality of the food that we eat
we're now mimicking what our Primal
ancestors were doing does that also
imply that we should exercise fasted
because I was thinking if thinking about
my ancestors they would have been doing
the most physical activity when they
hadn't eaten yet that's right yeah they
would have been doing the most physical
activity right before they ate yeah so
really interesting point and and you and
I were talking about this in the
beginning is that when you exercise in a
fasted State you're going to get rid of
the glucose that's been stored in your
muscles so as that glucose comes out
because your body body needs it to go
you know you you don't work 100% off of
ketones and 100% off of glucose you're
needing both of them at both time at at
at different moments of your day so when
you're exercising in a fasted State
you're getting ketones and your muscles
are releasing stored sugar which is
great for anybody who wants to lose
weight because now you can lean out
those muscles now let's go back to what
our Primal ancestors did when they came
home they ate meat they ate protein and
they stimulated something called mtor
mtor is when you actually create muscle
growth and what we now know is it takes
about 30 grams of protein to trigger
these amino acid receptor sites in the
muscles to cause them to grow stronger
so for you if you work out in a fasted
State you're going to release all those
stores you're going to have those
ketones for performance but then you
want to follow that up with protein so
you can build your muscles strong and
that is a hack that has worked
incredibly well for for so many people
okay historically people have thought
that
fasting is a one- siiz kind of fits all
um technique and there's one kind of
fasting which is you just I don't know
you might just not eat for a prolong
period of time but in your book and
throughout your work you describe these
six different types of fasting yeah what
are the six types of fasting and tell me
what the the difference is in outcome
and benefit yeah it's a great question
so again fasting is when we switch over
so now we're in the fat burning uh place
at about 13 to 15 hours we start making
ketones this is intermittent fasting
that's pretty much what most people when
they say they're intermittent fasting
that's what they're doing okay they take
12 to 16 hours yeah they're making
ketones testosterone's going up
inflammation's coming down hunger might
be going away they're kind of having
this they might be a lot of people lose
weight with that it's it's kind of the
most common fast does it matter from the
the window does it matter what time I
start and what time I end you get to
choose you choose what that window
should be so I could eat at 3:00 a.m.
you could there's a whole another level
we can talk about why you don't want to
eat in the dark what's ideal an ideal
window do you think um I really like it
depends on the on the time of the year
but in the summer I really like
somewhere if you're going to do an 8
Hour eating window like 11 to 7 in the
summer and then in the winter because
it's darker earlier you would do more
like a like a 10 to five kind of eating
window it's not so hard to do 11 to S
right
not hard at all not hard at all that's
not that's not fasting that's that's
just a slight having a a slightly later
breakfast and a slightly earlier dinner
yeah but it's it's like being
intentional right yeah exactly because
you don't want to you got to you got to
keep blood sugar low otherwise the
minute blood sugar goes up you're going
to switch over right so you can't put it
you know if you walk past the kitchen
and put a grape in your mouth yeah yeah
exactly yeah yeah which is you pulled
yourself guil of yes yes so that's the
first type of the six fast
um styles the second is I'm going to try
and say this
word or of ai ai AO
aagi it's one way of saying it people
say either call it um autophagy or
autophagy people say it different you
tell me I said it wrong I kind of landed
on autophagy I feel like autophagy is
the best way to say it autophagy fasting
what's that so autophagy fasting is
about 17 hours in with without food your
cells will turn within and they'll start
to heal themselves and that was what Dr
osi's big uh Discovery was is that the
cells clean themselves up so what's
interesting on this one and this is
something I really want to get out to
the world is that when you stimulate
autophagy what you're doing is you're
turning on the intelligence inside the
cell and that intelligence is looking
around and it's going hey there's a
virus there's a bacteria get them out so
let's push these infections out out of
the cell that mitochondria it's not
working well we need to repair it that
endoplasmic reticulum inside here it's
it's lagging we need to fix it so it
literally goes in and fixes everything
inside the cell just at 17 hours but one
of the greatest studies that was I've
seen in fasting was done during covid
and it showed that if a virus comes into
a cell that's in a state of autophagy it
can't replicate viruses have to live off
of your energy system so when viruses go
into a cell that's Laden with glucose
they have a party in there they love
that they munch on that and then they go
out and they start replicating if you
were in a fasted State when a virus
comes in it can't replicate there's
nothing inside that cell for that virus
to take over and it
dies why does that happen what's the
reason for the the that sort of the CEO
within my C looking around and saying
right let's clean all this stuff up well
because the it when once you've stim at
autophagy there is one goal for that
cell and that is survival so everything
in there is on high alert okay
everything is going to be in your
survival interest so a virus is not in
your surv survival interest so it pushes
it out so it's kind of like an emergency
signal because there's not been food for
a while
so it's kind of like the
last the last attempt to do everything
the body can to help you make it through
this period of hunger or that's right
that's right you've put yourself in this
state of extreme healing and it's all
based off of this idea that your body
wants to stay
alive okay so that's are you write in
your book that that's good for balancing
sex hormones and preventing colds so
yeah with with autophagy it's great for
preventing colds what here's what's
interesting about autophagy for sex
hormones is that the major part of your
brain for both men and women that
control hormonal all hormonal control is
your hypothalamus and pituitary that
part of the brain does not have a bloodb
brain barrier so it's very vulnerable to
toxins so whenever we have massive toxic
exposure that part of the brain starts
to malfunction we see this with uh
polycystic ovarian syndrome most common
hormonal imbalance for women well a lot
of that is this imbalance of
testosterone and estrogen and there's a
huge toxic piece that has destroyed or
or in interfered with the part of the
brain that control
hormones so when we look at
autophagy there are certain parts of our
system that are more uh easily
influenced by autophagy than others well
it turns out the hypothalamus and the
pituitary are easily influenced by
autophagy and can repair themselves when
they're in the state of
autophagy the other interesting cellular
makeup that is highly influenced by
autophagy are the the cells around the
testes and the cells around the ovaries
the those are the the cells that are
putting out sex hormones and if you that
whole system is malfunctioning when you
go into a state of autophagy those cells
will respond and become better cells and
be better at producing these hormones
because of you dipping in and out of the
state of
autophagy that really got me thinking
because I've been looking at a lot of
companies from an investment standpoint
at the moment that are trying to solve
for this macro decline in male
testosterone you know I had a few guests
come on this podcast and tell me that
male testosterone has been decl
declining year-over-year and then kind
of paired with that we're becoming more
and more sexless our libidos seem to be
in Decline I've got a lot of close
friends of mine that are taking certain
hormonal um supplements to try and get
their libidos back up and for the first
time ever in on a show called Dragon's
Den that I'm on in the UK we had someone
come into the den for an investment that
was producing a supplement to try and
get our sex drive back feels like a big
macro conversation that we're not having
and looking at your work and the work
around you've done about fasting and
what you said there it seems like there
could potentially be a link yeah between
the two the ways we're living our life
and what we're eating and our decline in
testosterone and our libidos there's a
beautiful book I don't know if you've
read it called countdown and it's about
the sperm counts going down in across
the world and I actually brought her
onto my podcast the woman who wrote the
book and she said that there's one
chemical that's reducing uh sperm counts
more than any and it's phades and phades
are in fragrances oh they're in our
Colones they're in our perfumes they're
in our laundry detergents they're in our
air fresheners they also are now
infiltrated into our water so they've
infiltrated into they're now being
sprayed on our Foods animals that are
drinking the water have phalates in them
so it's the number one toxin that's
destroying testosterone levels and it's
a brilliant book that she wrote you talk
about in the reset factory your first
book from 2016 chapter 10 you said
something which I hadn't quite um
appreciated you said that even the
things we put on our skin are absorbed
into our body um and then they go
directly into our bloodstream and into
our kidneys I didn't think when I read
that it got me thinking because there's
so many things that I sort of
unconsciously just spray on my body
right every day and I never look at
what's in them because I just think it's
on the outside and it'll wash off y but
now you're saying that yeah your skin is
a breathable organ so it's going to push
toxins out and it's going to take toxins
in so think about it if you've ever like
eaten something that didn't react well
with you you might get a rash that's
your brilliant body trying to push that
toxin out but the same thing happens
when you put something on your skin it
actually goes into your body so a good
general rule is if you aren't willing to
eat it don't put it on your skin and
beyond that if we even look at at the
microbiome you have bacteria on your
skin that protect you and that bacteria
is are actually talking to the bacteria
in our gut there's actually a connection
between the two bacteria so if you start
putting things on your skin that destroy
that microbiome you're actually going to
ultimately have an adverse effect on the
microbiome in your gut so what you put
on your skin is massively important and
then the smell we know the hippocampus
which is the seat of all Alzheimer's and
Dementia is also where the olfactory
nerve innervates so when we smell
something toxic and breathe something
toxic in it goes straight into the
hippocampus and starts to create
degeneration in those neurons that are
ultimately can lead to dementia and
Alzheimer's toxicity is a huge human
problem
toxicity when you say the word toxicity
how are you defining that you're saying
like toxic chemicals that we introduced
into our lives on our skin consume
inhale have around us Bingo and that are
in our Foods Etc yep Bingo what are what
are some of the the most toxic chemicals
or Foods or products that we consume
without thinking that you think we need
to stop consuming on a day-to-day basis
oh here's the most the easiest one is
Plastics BPA plastic they say that it's
that there's it's not a matter of if you
have plastic in your body it's a matter
of how much so let's use it in a in
context of something that people are
really motivated by which is weight loss
what's BPA plastics it's it's a it's a
chemical within plastic that's within
our water bottles it's on in our
Tupperware um they actually are putting
they're saying that they're now in the
microfibers of our of our clothes and
that's being washed out to this it gets
really depressing when you start talking
about toxins gets washed out into our
oceans so but the for the sake of
Simplicity it's it's you know bottles
mostly that you see but you know we've
got plastic containers we've got plastic
plates we've got plastic everything and
that is has BPA in it and that is a a a
toxin that destroys human health and the
biggest and most interesting thing that
BPA Plastics do is there was a study
around something called a Audy Mouse and
they took this mouse that had a gene for
obesity and they were twins they fed
them the same food they gave them the
same amount of exercise but one of the
mice got introduced BPA plastic and the
one that got the BPA plastic all of a
sudden started to gain weight and the
hair color started to change and they
that was the only difference between
these two mouse mice with the same
genetic profile and so then when they
detoxed the BPA plastic out the mouse
lost weight so that was the beginning of
us understanding a term called obesogens
and obesogens are toxins that actually
make us insulin resistant actually cause
us to hold on to to more weight and
that's just one category of
toxins well that's terrifying it is
terrifying to be completely you know
from the center of my heart this is it's
this is why we have to educate ourselves
this is why we have to wake up we have
to understand that we are living in the
most toxic time in human history and it
doesn't it's not just mental stress it's
not just social media it's a barrage of
all of that that is pulling us off
course and I can tell you that I have
sat with some of the most brilliant
doctors who are generally so concerned
on the direction of humanity and where
we're going because of the abundance of
these
toxins as you said that I could see a
sadness in your face where does that
come
from I think it's really easy when you
hear a podcast like this and and what
saying to reject what I'm saying because
it's it's too
overwhelming to
understand what the evolutionary
mismatch we're in right
now
we so many people are suffering whether
it's physical or mental mentally and
they don't realize that it's everything
from the food to their shampoos to the
plastic water bottles it's it's so vast
and yet nobody doing anything about it
and and that's where my heart hurts it's
like people are suffering that don't
need to be suffering and if they
understood that the modern world we're
living in has taken us so off course
with our health and we've got to start
to one by one figure out how to bring it
back on
course and you know yesterday I sat with
um Dr Dale bredis on my and interviewed
him on my podcast he wrote a book called
the end of Alzheimer's and he laid out
seven things that we need to do to stop
Al Alzheimer's and he strongly feels
that Alzheimer's is optional you don't
have to you don't have to get that and
those seven
things are so intense like it's
everything from detoxing to
metabolically switching to prioritizing
sleep to human connection to um
understanding e you know what the best
exercise is for you and it's easy for
humans to look at those seven things and
go I'm out I can't do all
that but we if we want to exist on this
planet we're going to have to do that
that's the new level of Health we're in
right now and I'm I love being the
cheerleader I want to be the one that's
like come on we can do it but I also
need people to understand that where
we're living as humans right now is a
very very dangerous place and it's just
in the existence of moving in and out of
grocery stores and restaurants and you
know and the drugstore everything has a
toxic insult on us and it's overwhelming
it's
overwhelming drastic action because
we've we're so drastically far away from
where we're supposed to be Y where our
ancestors were y we've built up this
Society that's full of plastics and
toxins and alcohol and drugs and sugar
everywhere and I can't move in bloody
New York city which is where we are now
without someone offering me you know
every block is almost every block is
really bad food horrible but food that
tempts the certain part of my brain that
maybe is looking to help me stay alive
and to survive whether it's pizza or
sweets or whatever it might be yeah um
so it's it is difficult and I have a
great deal of empathy for anyone that's
struggling yeah with it me too me too
it's a it's a it's it's it's we've hit a
point where the door out of poor health
is
multifaceted it's not just one door and
if you're healthy and you're just like
you know someone like you just wants to
get in better shape then the path is a
little bit easier MH but what do we do
for the for the person that gets the
cancer diagnosis what do we do for the
woman who's suicidal in going through
her menopause years like where are we
helping her how are we getting to them
and each time they walk into their
doctor's office they're typically giving
getting a pill and not being taught how
to live a life that works with their
body in this modern world that's where
we have to get to quick one before we
get back to this episode just give me 30
seconds of your time two things I wanted
to say the first thing is a huge thank
you for listening and tuning into the
show week after week means the well to
all of us and this really is a dream
that we absolutely never had and
couldn't have imagined getting to this
place but secondly it's a dream where we
feel like like we're only just getting
started and if you enjoy what we do here
please join the 24% of people who watch
this channel regularly and have hit the
Subscribe button means more than I can
say and if you hit that subscribe button
here's a promise I'm going to make to
you I'm going to do everything in my
power to make this show as good as I can
now and into the future we're going to
deliver the guests that you want me to
speak to and we're going to continue to
keep doing all of the things you love
about the show thank you thank you so
much back to the episode you told me
about the first two styles of fasting
the first one was intim fasting which is
12 to 16 hours which is good for weight
loss brain fog that kind of thing the
second is autography autophagy what did
I say autography but I like it I said
autophagy I said autophagy we can play
that back I definitely said autophagy
and if I didn't we'll fix it with AI um
autophagy fasting which is 17 to 72
hours good for balancing sex hormones
and preventing illness yeah number three
we haven't spoken about gut reset fast
yeah what's that yeah so that's based
off uh a study that came out of MIT that
showed 24 hours without food and your
intestinal stem cells inside your gut
actually start to reboot themselves now
a stem cell is a cell that can go to
anywhere in the body and repair itself
but at 24 hours you get a plethora of
them in your gut and in the gut we've
got a damaged microbiome from everything
that that we've just been talking about
so what I discovered in this 24-hour
fast is I could take women that have
been on birth control pill for years um
people that had been on multiple rounds
of antibiotics people who had been
eating horrible food and I could
actually put them through a 24-hour fast
once a week once every couple of weeks
and these stem cells would come in there
and they would start to repair and so
now if I teach that person How to Eat
Right their food is actually starting to
build a better microbiome in the gut so
that 24-hour fast became this go-to in
my clinic where I could take all these
gut challenges and I could start to
unwind them just because I knew the body
had this capability of making these
intestinal stem cells and it was crazy
like we got people off supplements we
got people that were didn't weren't
making serotonin which affects moods
comes from the gut all of a sudden
started to become happier people who
hadn't had bowel movements in like three
days all of a sudden we started to put
in these this gut reset and it was like
a miracle it was incredible number four
fat burner fast so the fat burner fast
is probably my favorite for those people
who want to lose weight the research was
done that 36 hours without food followed
by 12 hours of eating and then another
30 they actually did it over a 30-day
period but we've been using it in our
community just dosing it in that at 36
hours what happens is that's enough time
where the blood sugars come come down
where all of a sudden the body it's so
smart it goes okay blood sugar's not
common we've been in this fasted State
we've triggered autophagy we've brought
inflammation down we've made you ketones
we're trying to go find food but this
extra weight it's not serving you you
because remember you got to go find food
so it drops weight and it's the most
beautiful way to get a person to unstick
any kind of weight loss resistance
but most importantly you know where it
dropped the most amount of weight from
where does everybody want to lose weight
belly yep so it is the I probably should
have called it the fat burning belly fat
burning yeah the belly fat yeah that
would have banged yeah but yeah and so
that's what they showed is that actually
a 36-hour fast started to unstick weight
loss and it was started with weight
around the
belly
compelling number five the dopamine
reset fast yeah so number five um I
found some research showing that when
people go without food for 48 hours the
whole dopamine system will be rebooted
so what's important to know about the
dopamine system is it is our molecule of
happiness it is the thing that it's
actually a motivation molecule and it's
a neurotransmitter that allows thoughts
happy thoughts to go across from neuron
to neuron and so what happens and I'm
sure you've talked about this on your
podcast that were so dopamine saturated
right now but specifically people who
are Overeaters they actually are finding
the study I quote in the book is that
they found that people who had food
addiction people who had extra weight
like obese
situations they were not getting as much
happiness out of their food because
their dopamine receptor sites were
saturated so they had to eat more food
to get more happiness and a lot and you
know food is a state Chang it does make
us happy so what they found is if they
put them into a 48 hour fast that they
actually rebooted the whole dopamine
system and new dopamine Reyes appeared
so that when they brought food back in
to the equation they actually got more
enjoyment out of food with less food
this kind of got me thinking about a
conversation I was having yesterday with
some of my team here we were talking
about how um it almost feels like
sometimes if I've eaten sugar I can go
into a bit of a sugar cycle and what I
mean by that is I'll have some sugar and
then like a couple of hours later I'll
have another craving for sugar and then
a couple of hours later I'll have
another craving for sugar but then at
other times specifically for example
when I did keto I was I did the keto
diet for about eight months uh eight
weeks bloody eight months I wish um
eight weeks and throughout that period I
didn't have any cravings for sugar yep I
would we had some chocolate come into
the studio and I walked over to the
chocolate and I smelled it yep and I
didn't want any of it yep it had gone
but then when I'm in my what I call like
the sugar cycle I'm eating sugar maybe
you know once twice a day and I'm
getting like the craving for it where
which I just can't seem to resist yep
well dopamine's the molecule more it's
not the molecule of enough so what it
does is when you get sugar you get this
dopamine rush and the Brain goes woo
love that give me more of that and so
you con you it's it's endless you will
never be fully satisfied it constantly
wants you to come back for more and more
and more so when you start to go off the
ketogenic Energy System you're getting
the same Foria you probably felt the
same high the same mental Clarity but
you've totally taken this molecule more
out of the out of the picture it's it in
fact dopamine will actually you know you
you get those receptor sites that will
be repaired but you're not getting a big
dopamine buzz when you're in a ketogenic
State you're getting ketones I was I was
mulling it with my team how long I had
to stay away from sugar to kind of get
out of that vicious give me more cycle
yeah my experience has been it's about
three days three days that's what I
thought yeah I think I said four or five
but it's just from experience as well if
I haven't had sugar for 3 or four days I
mean like a like a chocolate but
something significant in terms of sugar
then after three or four days the
craving for it seems to to vanish yeah
yeah it's not it's not if you think
about that it's not hard if you're
trying to overcome a sugar addiction
yeah like just bear it for three days
and then that dopamine stops barking at
you and then if you attack fasting onto
it now you're getting ketones and so
you're not needing that as much ketones
kill hunger and they make you so
mentally mentally clear they give you
this euphoric feeling so you don't have
that urge to go for the for the sugar
and the ketones come from fasting which
is when your body switches metabolic
State go yeah the last and final fasting
style immune reset fast yeah so immune
reset was built off of Dr vter Longo's
work and he did a study on people who
had cancer and were going through ch
therapy and one of the challenges we
know about chemotherapy is that it wipes
out the whole immune system and so he
wanted to see well what if I put
somebody in a fasted State as they went
through chemotherapy would there be a
difference and what he found is after
three days of fasting the white blood
cells in our system actually reboot
themselves so what they do is all old
white blood cells are are sloughed away
and new white blood cells emerge so
people were able to come out of that
chemo therapy experience and have a
stronger immune system as opposed to
what we were seeing was that it was
wiping the immune system out so that
launched the whole three-day water fast
sort of craze at least here in America
we're seeing a lot of people that are
just going after three-day water fast to
Prime their immune system but you also
also at three days get stem cells full
systemic stem cells so all of a sudden
your body's got in surging with stem
cells going to all parts of the body
repairing it the great example I always
use on this one was I had an Achilles
tendon injury and nothing was nothing
was helping it so I threw a 5-day water
fast at it on the fourth day I felt this
buzz in my achilles tendon I was like oh
wonder what that is and it stayed all
the way through I went five full days
and um about the fifth and sixth day so
sixth day I was entering food back in
all the pain completely went away and it
never came back I tried everything I
tried everything and that was the only
thing that repaired
it it does make again evolutionary sense
that if our body senses we're injured
because we're not eating or you know
some other signal that we
are on a course to not survive to put it
nicely it does make sense that it might
set about to repair whatever needs to be
repaired you're getting it you know
because like if I was a wounded human
back in on the savanas of I don't know
Africa or wherever we came from um and
I'm laid there and I'm not eating my
body should probably go okay Steve might
need something fixed so he can get back
to yeah hunting so you're getting it so
survival that is the number one priority
of the body so when you go without food
you amplify every resource it has to
keep you alive and if repairing my
Achilles means I can now go hunt for
food it's going to do that it's going to
make me stronger and I in the book I I
stumbled when I was writing the book I
stumbled upon a really cool hypothesis
that's called the Thrifty Gene
hypothesis and it said that what it's a
theory obviously it's a hypothesis it's
a theory that the people the humans that
evolved out of the Primal days had a
very specific genotype and this genotype
allowed us to metabolically flex and and
be stronger in a fasted State because we
had to survive and the people that
didn't make it from that time period
didn't have that Gene but think about
this for this moment so they think we
all have this Gene inside of us right
now this Thrifty Gene where we can go
long periods without food and we can
survive so what happens when we're
eating all day what happens when we're
ignoring and we're not actually
activating that genetic profile
so what they are now believing is that
diabetes metabolic syndrome all of that
is largely happening because we are
going against the G the genetic profile
that we are now seeing in humans we're
like on the opposite end of the spectrum
we're overloading our bodies
yeah which is meaning that the survival
Gene you referen there is not being
activated to help us that's right that's
right interesting what about what about
coffee you know if I'm going to fast
asked for I know people are so addicted
to coffee so I feel like I have to ask a
question as their representative if I'm
going to fast do any of these six fasts
that you just mentioned does coffee
break that fast yeah it does break it no
well it depends okay so this is this I'm
just I yes or
no um I can't give you a yes or no on it
I'm going to give you most likely okay
no let me give you most likely it's okay
okay most likely it's okay yes there's
not a high degree of certainty and
conviction there no let me let me
explain myself okay so when you drink a
cup of coffee it shouldn't spike your
blood sugar it shouldn't should not it
doesn't so if it does it shouldn't so if
you have black coffee and your blood
sugar doesn't Spike and you're you're
trying to metabolically switch over into
your fasting window you're good you're
golden drink that black coffee okay okay
now I'm gonna add some sugar to it okay
now now you're not switch now you've
pulled you've pulled yourself out of
fasted State uh okay so no sugar just a
plain coffee with no milk or sugar in it
is is most likely going to keep you in a
fasted State most likely uh well I've
seen a few occasions where it didn't
okay um this is why we have people test
their blood sugar like it it it's Unique
to you so you can test your blood sugar
have the cup of coffee half an hour
later check your blood sugar again those
numbers should be equal okay so for most
people coffee should be fine when
they're fasting but there's a couple of
an anomalies who their blood sugar does
Spike yes um which means that they're
not going to switch over to the fasted
State yes yes exactly and you know
coffee mate
creamers um those can be a little more
problematic um but some people put full
fat cream in there with no sugar um some
people put MCT oil in there you know the
buttered coffee became very very common
and that was because of the fasting
movement so the reason they did that was
because when you put a fat in coffee you
stabilized your blood sugar and so you
were able to stay in the fasted State
and switch over I had glucose God this
on the podcast who um Jesse she talks a
lot about glucose spikes it was the
first time my eyes were really open to
the consequence of living a life where
your glucose levels are spiking and
crashing and spiking and crashing and
I've invested in this company called Zoe
where they give you a glucose monitor
which I attached to my arm for 14 days
as part of the initial test and then
they give me this big sort of nutrition
plan and profile and um that was the
first time I got to see you know I was
in America at the time I was I was in LA
for a couple of months and I in La I
mean I pulled up at a gas station and I
was it's funny I was walking through
this gas station and everything in there
was sugar it's CU cuz now I was looking
right now I had my eyes open cuz I'm
wearing this bloody monitor so I'm about
to see the impact within minutes that it
has on my body and I was just looking
around thinking oh my God the only thing
that I can see in this whole store that
I can eat without spiking my glucose is
water so is it a monitor where you can
see it you can scan it yeah yeah so so
they've got two Game Changer yeah so
they've got two one of them you scan the
new one they've got it's automatic by
Bluetooth so it just keeps constantly
updating on your phone I honestly think
we could dramatically change the health
of the world if everybody put one of
those on amen amen because then what you
would do is you would just go cuz you
know this is like coffee like you should
it should be so simple for me just to
say yes drink your coffee you're fine
but your microbiome in your gut is going
to determine what it does with whatever
hits that so it's going to determine
your blood sugar levels your microbiome
my microbiome completely different so
food no longer is a one-size fits all
there's an individual approach so you
have to know what your blood sugar is
doing yeah you know like when I eat
believe it or not when I eat a grass-fed
steak my blood sugar goes down it's
amazing wow so whereas other people eat
a steak and their blood sugar goes Super
high and so then again you go to a
thread of this conversation which is how
do we help Humanity yeah and Humanity
wants the one size fits all I can't give
you that yeah you're gonna have to learn
your own you got to learn you and
something like that teaches you you but
you're going to have to become very
curious about you like you are and
what's really fun to me when you put one
of those things on I it's my favorite
thing to do with patience is I say just
eat normal just eat everything yeah yeah
yeah and then and then every day I have
them send me their readings and we just
talk it through I I just did this with a
beautiful patient that I've been working
with who has a long history of eating
disorders and she was counting calories
and um really wanted the control of
being able to keep her weight where she
was where where it needed to be and I
said okay you can count calories if you
want but I just want you to stick this
monitor on and let's just eat and let's
see what you're doing and she was vegan
and and this isn't a this isn't an
anti-vegan conversation but her spikes
were up and down and up and down like
there was like eight of them a day and
her moods followed those spikes too and
so then we started to go okay well let's
add a protein here could we add fat here
could we add some more fiber here and
she got to watch for herself and within
four weeks she was free of any food
control and she was off teaching
everybody else it was so beautiful to
watch that calorie counting point
though there's a there's a big school of
thought that in order to lose weight and
be healthy all you've got to do is count
those calories yeah you know there's
something called a set point have you
heard about the set point yeah which is
the amount of calories that I need to
consume in order to hit my that's right
so we all have a set point if you're
going to go down the calorie path you H
you have to understand you have a set
point and the set point is there's a mo
how much calories coming in and how much
calories going out what's the Delta of
that and that will keep you at whatever
weight you want to be so let's use an
example you eat 1,500 calories a day you
exercise 500 you have a Delta of a
thousand so if you want to keep your
weight where it's at you always have to
do a th000 calories every single day
yeah okay well what happens on the day
you decide not to work out so now you
have 500 extra calories that your body's
not used to and so what does it do with
those calories stores it so then you all
of a sudden start you're gaining weight
and you don't really understand why so
you're like well let me count I need to
restrict calories yeah so then you start
eating maybe I mean I have less yeah and
then you bring the set point down well
that's your new that's your new set
point you're going to have to stay at
that set point now if you don't ever
want to gain another
pound you see the game oh okay so my set
point is moving the crafty it moves
because as you restrict and you if as
food restriction goes down and energy
output goes up your set point goes down
and now you're like I feel great but you
can't leave from that set point you're
going to always have to make sure that
that set point is 1,000 calories or 800
calories so I was told I mean this is
the school of thought that I have to
have for me as a male that has my weight
2,000 calories a day and then if I'm
under 2,000 calories a day then I'll
lose weight that's what I was told yeah
so you go now you go to 1500 calories
you drop weight yeah to lose the weight
yep you go back up to 2,000 and for most
people they start to gain weight again
ah because my my set point has moved so
now it's 1,500 yeah to maintain my
weight yeah which is why if you think
about it have we have we ever seen a
calorie restriction diet work long term
no right I haven't longterm being the
key word there yeah it's short term it
it works great but this is why I'm such
a fan of metabolic switching how about
we watch blood sugar we put a monitor
like you're talking let's put a monitor
on so that you keep your blood sugar
spikes minimal it's like what I did with
this woman is I was like let's can we
have two two spikes in a day not eight
and we just keep your blood sugar at a
at a at a low level so that when you're
not eating you can switch over and now
you can burn fat in the fat burning
Energy System so metabolic switching is
where you're keeping your blood sugar at
a stable place it's not got all these
Spikes all over the place so that when
it starts to go down the body is going
to want to switch over and it can start
to burn fat in the in and use that other
energy system what do you think our
relationship should be with
sugar well you know there's only 12% of
Americans that are metabolically
healthy is that means that they have the
right blood pressure the right
cholesterol that their hemoglobin A1c
their insulin all those metabolic
markers are in Balance only
12% of Americans have that
right that is a huge problem and that is
largely because we're addicted to
Sugar so what's the consequence of poor
metabolic health obesity cancer heart
disease mental health challenges I mean
you name it every chronic disease on the
planet at the root has a metabolic
thread now I hate to to bring back a a a
a really traumatic concept uh topic but
during covid when we looked at the
people that fell prey to covid this is
no no disrespect they were metabolically
unhealthy and the people that had less
covid symptoms were the ones that were
more metabolically healthy in general so
and largely because the virus could grow
could really replicate if you had a lot
of glucose in your system so the
consequence is huge and the health care
Consequence the amount of money we pay
trying to help everybody put their
health back together because they're
metabolically unhealthy if we just
started with metabolic Health we would
change everything and metabolic Health
people think of metabolic Health often
as being you know I'm in good
superficial
shape I'd like to think um but that's
not metabolic Health you could be I'm
guessing you can be metabolically
unhealthy but also have abs oh oh yeah
you could this woman I was telling you
about with all the the spikes she was
she's actually a a model and an actress
oh wow that that is beautiful and we had
to go back in and really work with
getting her metabolically healthy so
yeah you we call it skinny fat you look
you look skinny on the outside but
you're dealing with excess sugar on the
inside that is putting fat around your
liver putting fat in other areas I think
a lot of people can relate to that
skinny fat concept yeah so it's it's a
major major issue and and you know we
can look at different things like
hemoglobin A1c it's a marker in the
blood everybody gets it tested every
year when they go to their doctor it
should be under five if it's not under
five what's happening is all that extra
sugar is is going around your red blood
cells and your red blood cells carry
oxygen to your body so they're gummed up
with sugar so they can't deliver things
oxygen to the brain to your eyes to your
muscle so you're not getting oxygenated
because of the sugar just gumming up
these blood
cells in chapter one of your book you
talk about this um metabolic Health
crisis in great detail you share some
stats which I pulled out which I I
thought were terrifying it's page page
four of your book you say according to
the CDC 41% of women and TW 21 and older
are obese 45% have high blood pressure
out of two one out of two will develop
cancer in their lifetimes one out of
five will develop Alzheimer's one out of
nine will get typed two diabetes one out
of eight will develop a thyroid problem
and 80% of all autoimmune conditions
occur in
women why is that that last one 80% of
all autoimmune conditions occur in women
yeah so autoimmunity is a really
interesting one um and um if you look at
what an autoimmune condition is it's the
body attacking
itself and so when we look at where to
go we're back of the toxins Hashimoto
why is the body attacking the thyroid
there's something there that needs to
get out so it's usually a toxic issue so
the body's attacking the the thyroid
when we look at ra and Joints there's
toxins in there body's attacking that so
it's happening more to women largely
because well this is this this could go
dark real fast but largely because we
have so many influences that are
affecting our our horm hormones so the
best way I can explain this is something
I call the hormonal hierarchy where our
sex hormones are going to be completely
thrown off by insulin so when you get
insulin resistant your sex hormones are
off and insulin is going to be so
impacted by cortisol so when you're
stressed all the time you're going to be
insulin resistant and when you're
insulin insulin resistant you're going
to have trouble balancing estrogen
progesterone and testosterone but at the
top of the hierarchy is oxy toin and
oxytocin is that we're getting oxytocin
right now just from connecting with each
other and it'll calm start to calm
cortisol down and then when it calms
cortisol down you can be more insulin
sensitive and when you can be more
insulin sensitive now your sex hormones
can can balance better so we need that
hierarchy as as women to be in balance
in order for our bodies to be in Balance
but what do we have women doing right
now we have poor diet lots of stress uh
and our our sex hormones are way off
which sugar and sugar you're going after
the sugar yeah so women are are are
perishing within this modern world more
than
men so we've got to help a woman bring
back more insulin sensitiv sensitivity
we got to get her doing better uh Stress
Management and when we do that now the
immune system can regulate now the
immune system can calm down and stop
being so hyperactive attacking all the
toxins that are in the body so it's very
complex does that imply that women and
men have a different relationship with
stress oh yeah yeah yeah for sure we're
not I okay so I'm gonna I'm gonna be as
bold as to say this and I know all my my
feminist women out there are not going
to like this and I I was raised by a
strong woman I am a strong woman I've
raised another strong woman and I have
to tell you that we are not meant to
handle the stress loads as well as men
and that's largely because of two
hormones so estrogen makes us very out
outward makes us very much an extrovert
and we can handle a lot of stress when
when estrogen is present in our body but
progesterone she can't handle stress at
all so progesterone will start to
diminish a as cortisol goes up I always
say when when cortisol goes High
progesterone becomes shy so now we're I
the number of women since fast like a
girl came out that I have heard from the
20 and 30 year olds that have no cycle
none that is because they're insulin
resistant they're more stressed
progesterone's not making her appearance
so there's no shed of the uterine lining
that is absolutely a stress issue and
not having a period for a woman is a
major problem because that's how we
detox that's how we get these hormones
out of us so if you're not having a
cycle you're not getting rid of estrogen
you're not getting rid of so many toxins
and it's just staying inside of
you that's that's a major
problem controversial idea but it rings
true for a lot of people yeah and I know
this because I've had women very close
to me in my life talk to me about this
exact thing and
um specifically not having their
menstrual cycle and
then focusing on the stresses in their
life and then comes back the menstrual
cycle coming back um people very very
close to me in fact that I've I've
struggled with because of this exact
challenge
yeah it is a controversial idea though
isn't it it's a it's slightly
problematic um as an idea is there any
scientific basis for that idea well we
know based off science that when
cortisol goes up progesterone goes down
cortisol is the stress hormone yeah so
when you're under stress cortisol goes
up
and so if you're let's say it's the week
before your period That's when you're
supposed to have the most amount of
progesterone if it doesn't matter if
you're trying to run a marathon doesn't
matter if you have a work deadline
doesn't matter if you're skiing on sleep
as long as cortisol is going up
progesterone is not going to make her
appearance and if she doesn't make her
appearance then the uterine lining won't
shed that's that's been proven over and
over every hormone expert would agree
multiple studies but women don't realize
that so we if there's ever a time to
mind your stress it's the week before
your period which is why you don't fast
the week before your period because
that's a that's a bit of a stressor it's
why you shouldn't train for you know a
big Spartan Race or a crossfitting event
or a run a marathon you should be doing
more yoga and Recovery the week before
your period this is why we should
prioritize sleep the week before our
periods because that we don't want
cortisol up so in a in an interesting
world this is sort of the vision I have
for women right now
is what if there is this moment where
the week before our period we have the
the capability of maybe not working as
hard they're like Spain they're giving a
three-day menstrual leave to
women they with no questions asked
before before the period or well it's no
questions asked they anticipated it that
women would use it the first three days
of her period but a woman can use it any
time I say use it the three days before
your cycle is supposed to come
interesting Have you shared this idea
before publicly uh I've on several
podcasts I've talked about it I had a
great interview with Kate northrip um on
my podcast and she's an entrepreneur and
she actually Maps her whole business
cycle around her menstrual cycle and so
we had a beautiful conversation about
this and she said that she doesn't do as
many Zoom calls she tells her team that
she's going to take get get off uh work
a little bit earlier on those days she
slows everything down her workload goes
dramatically down and she said what
ended up happening is that when her
period started her productivity went up
so see what when estrogen comes in on on
starting day one day two of our
menstrual cycles estrogen makes us
really mentally clear makes us very
verbal estrogen's an incredible hormone
for
productivity but if you aren't minding
that back half of your cycle and you're
not slowing down
then then you're coming into your period
and you're having you hear so many women
who are like I'm cramping I'm bleeding a
lot it's really painful that's because
you didn't mind the back half of your
cycle and what's the sort of
evolutionary basis for all of this why
is the body doing this why is the body
um not going to give us our periods I
mean listen I don't have a period but um
well I have a version of it right I'm
sure men have some kind of you guys you
guys have a you work off a 24-hour cycle
okay so every 15 minutes you get
testosterone okay you know we joke about
that right what do you say you J behind
our
backs kind of what' you say the joke is
like if you don't like what your
husband's saying just ask him in 15
minutes he might say something different
oh that's what you've been say oh just
letting you in on what might be going on
behind the scenes okay so what is the
evolutionary basis for why why that is
true so think about yeah let's go back
to our Primal days so you know
testosterone is meant to have you go out
and Hunt it's some very motivating it's
you get it every 15 minutes so you know
God this sounds as I'm saying it sounds
so sexist but when we look at the body
this is actually how we're built so you
were your body was driven to go hunt and
go find and Go Achieve that's the number
one hormone that it works off of for the
women what our we are meant to be more
outgoing before ovulation okay why is
that oh we need to connect we need to
start to feel that that mental Clarity
you know estrogen makes your hair really
like full and your skin really glow and
it starts to make us more beautiful all
leading up to to ovulation once
ovulation hits now we have estrogen at
our Peak we have a little bit of
testosterone and we have a little bit of
progesterone okay well why is that
because now we our libidos up we're
motivated to reproduce we're looking
beautiful because we have so much
estrogen going through our body we're
verbal we can connect and we have
progesterone to keep us calm so we're
supposed to reproduce when ovulation
hits and then the back half technically
we would be have a fertilized egg and we
would be winding
down and if we didn't get a fertilized
egg then we're supposed to relax so we
can go back and do the extroverted piece
of our elves in the front half of our
cycle so it's all based off of
reproduction so I need some advice then
because I'm in a relationship and I want
to understand I guess this goes both
ways I want my girlfriend to understand
how hormones are influencing my behavior
and I want to know how hormones are
influencing her behavior yeah what
advice have you got for me well the
first is do you know her
cycle moving on we're going to talk
about sugar again no no this is too good
so sugar it's really bad isn't it who's
to blame no seriously tell me about your
childhood know get to know her cycle I'm
GNA give you I'm Gonna Give You gold now
let me give you gold okay so day one of
her cycle day one to day 10 she's
building estrogen first couple of days
of her cycle just let her be like she
you know that she's transitioning out of
the back half of her cycle she might be
having some heavier bleeding you know
she's moving into that extroverted place
so the first two days give her some
space now day three estrogen's starting
to to build so you're going to notice
she's more verbal she's going to be more
present she might feel more outgoing
she's going to feel like she wants to
connect with you that's going to go all
the way through ovulation like in the
middle of ovulation which is about day
12 day 13 where all of a sudden
estrogens at its peak if you have any
conflict you want to resolve with her do
it between like day two and day 12 of
her cycle she's going to be so ready to
handle any conflict with you between let
me write that
down day day two and day 12 day two like
literally my battles I had a I had a dad
come to me and tell me that he was
struggling to understand his teenage
daughter and I said well do you know her
cycle and he was like no I don't I said
well you would never ever bring a
conflict to her on day 18 or 19 of her
cycle bring it to her on day 10 10 and
now she's going to talk to you I'm going
to say something which is really
embarrassing here I know nothing about
menstrual cycles and no point in my life
did anybody teach me about menstrual
cycles the only Insight I have in my
life to what a menstrual cycle is is
overhearing my sister when I was younger
talking about it yeah and when I say
overhearing I mean maybe a sentence and
then maybe my girlfriend once in a while
she'll say oh I'm coming into my cycle
or whatever she'll say I'm on my period
that's for most men that's in fact the
extent of the education we have about
the female
reproductive um menal menstrual cycles y
so talk to me like I'm an idiot about
the menstrual cycle yeah how long is it
oh I love this and do you know that most
women don't know oh really so I mean
most women are ignorant to their own
Cycles so it's 28 days anywhere from 28
days to 32 every woman has a different
length okay and what day does the period
come on day one so day one is the first
day she bleeds okay then how long that
lost for what seven days uh it
everyone's different anywhere from three
to seven days okay so day you said day
between day two and 12 is when to pick
my battles yes so day two you're going
to start to see her being emerge a
little more gregarious she may be a
little more outgoing so I mean as she
get closer to day 12 you want to go
party with her you want to take her out
make her feel good like that's the time
to whine and dine her okay cool we'll
put all the dates then and the fights
and then after day 12 what am I doing
then after day well okay so day 12 is
right when she's ovulating so you're GNA
have to choose your battle there but
ovulation occurs for most women between
day 10 and day 15 there's a small little
five-day window there that's if this is
a when once I figured this out I was
like why don't why don't men know this
um that's when she's going to be her
libido is going to be the highest okay
so we're having sex one day yes so if
you want to have sex with her I'm just
writing this down have sex with her
around that time around that time if
she's willing yeah she's going to be
more motivated cuz she has testosterone
she's going to feel more like it okay
then after she finishes ovulating off
day 15 yeah so then there's going to be
a crash of hormones you might see a
change in her personality she might feel
a little low go stay in a
hotel but you could ask you know like if
she's having a bummer day like or a low
day ask her do you know what day your
cycle are you on be really nice be
really nice really nice and then here's
the gold here's gold this is so good
you're going to have to report back to
me how this works uh when around day 17
or 18 Gest drones coming in this is
where you got to give her foot rubs you
got to be extra special and cater her
like like she's the queen that she
deserves to be okay so all my
compliments that's where I pull out the
notepad but what you need to know is
she's probably going to be like if
you're like oh you look so beautiful
today she might at that time be like no
I feel horrible I'm bloated I'm I don't
feel beautiful but and I should disagree
I should say no you no you you're no you
don't you look amazing okay cool and you
do that till she bleeds and you take
amazing care of her in the back the week
before her period and you will get kudos
like you you can't even imagine and then
start it all over again and then start
it all over again got you yeah I mean
just once you understand our patterns
and then it also helps you understand
that we're going to be more outgoing in
the front half of our cycle we're going
to be more introverted in the back half
what about men you guys every 15 minutes
you you're pretty you're pretty black
and white really yeah you're pretty
straightforward
so if she was asking you the same
question about me would you say anything
to her about my hormone Cycles at all
you you just say what it it really
depends on the issue at hand so if it's
a a a mismatch of libido then the best
time to have sex with a woman is during
ovulation okay which because she has the
most amount of testosterone day 10 to 15
of her CLE it would be really handy
wouldn't it just to have a little
menstrual cycle chart on the wall at
home I know that sounds a bit strange
but just so I know what's going on
inside bud I the first time I discovered
this I started using an app called The
Clue app yeah and it shows you in a
circle it kind of shows a little cloud
and then it shows you where PMs Clicks
in and it actually has a button that you
can share it with people in your life
and I thought not only does my husband
need this but my staff needs this they
need to understand where I'm going and
what if all the women on my on my team
actually shared it with each other and
we could see where each other was at in
the menstrual cycle we would understand
why a woman's moods can be so up and
down it's really you know it because of
these three hormones our moods are much
more volatile than yours you guys are
pretty steady Edy we're a and this is
general you know this is I hate to be
sexist in this conversation but this is
hormones and the way they work it's
actually really helpful to know this
because without this Insight it's very
easy to fall into the Trap of just
assuming your partner is Moody or that
they are they have like mood swings or
that they're you know people say things
like they're too emotional or they're
whatever it might be but with this I
actually think it creates a ton of
empathy yeah that's certainly the
reaction that I get from hearing that
there's a there's significant hormone
fluctuations in my partner and they
happen at certain periods it actually
now would change my behavior the way
that I receive certain times where I
come home or I'm I that my my my partner
is just different Y and it's almost it
catches me off guard sometimes I've
actually we've spoken a lot about this
and we're very open we're very much the
same person in terms of our willingness
to talk about everything um and very
difficult things as well yeah and there
will be times where um I come home or we
go through a patch where just a week you
know things
are making her upset which wouldn't
normally make her upset just tiny things
that I'm doing and I go I what that's it
like yeah you know so see if you can
track that to a certain part of her
cycle oh I'm kidding so like the week
before our period we're pretty we're
irritable and every time I say that men
go well you said it I didn't say it well
but that's because progesterone we you
know we're meant to be more inner we're
meant to sit on the couch we're also
meant Believe It or Not glucose goes
higher the week before our period so We
crave carbs there's a reason We crave
carbs because we need to bring glucose
up to be able to make progesterone so We
crave carbs we're irritable we don't
want a lot of cortisol so generally
we're a little bit slower we don't want
to you know we don't have the desire to
push through stress and push through
exercise and so we're going to be we're
a little we're different that week where
so if you come up and you just put your
hand on our shoulder and you're like I
love you you're amazing I'm here if you
need anything that's all you got to do
but if you're trying to resolve a big
conflict or you're trying to come at us
in in too aggressive of a way we will
shut down the week before our
periods so interesting whereas if you
have something you want to resolve with
us make sure estrogen's there because
estrogen makes us great great verbal our
verbal skills are incredible when
estrogen's around ask any menopausal
woman she'll tell you what it's like
when she loses estrogen and I have to
say this is because you know women have
this incredible power to create life
yeah that us men don't have it's like
women are super Heroes for being able to
carry a baby for significant amounts of
time and then give birth to this baby
it's just the most magical thing that I
can think of in existence and women have
that superpower and with that comes the
cycle yeah so it's a wonderful thing
it's beautiful and the in in the book I
called it the manifestation phase
ovulation because when all of those
hormones come in we can manifest
anything we want but it's not just a
baby this is a great time ovulation is
an amazing time to start a new business
project interesting it's a great time
like as an author like I'm going to
write during those five days because my
creativity is going to be at its peak so
we're highly creative if you want to
like you know talk about something about
life and how to create something with us
do it during ovulation your
husband is behind that wall here in my
home and does is he aware of your
menstrual cycle he he is until I started
to lose it I'm 53 so I'm it's starting
to go um but yeah we talk like this all
the time and and the way I like to to I
like to take ownership over my hormonal
moods so I will say to him after a long
day of work I will say hey it's been a
testosterone driven day for me I don't
feel like I have a lot of estrogen right
now I can't handle a lot of stress I'm
going to need to just take some time to
myself we literally talk like that we
um losing the menstrual cycle we the
first time I started as a young man that
hasn't been exposed to that at any point
in my sort of you know in the education
system or other um the first time I
started to understand what menopause was
and premenopause and Par menopause all
these things was from guests that have
come here and it's such a big it was
such a big light bulb moment for me
because I have um women in my life that
are going through that phase of life and
I feel like they are so misunderstood in
so many ways thank you and I love
hearing about it now um because it's
going to help me relate to those women
in a better way and have and understand
how I can
be a partner with them through that
phase of life like you know certain
members of my family that are going
through that phase of Life what do what
do we need to know as men but also as
women about menopause per menopause and
all those things thank you thank you for
asking I think that we're the most
misunderstood um age group of women and
with the 45 to 55 year old in that
decade is the most common time for women
to commit suicide really yeah this is
why my next book I'm writing right now
is on the mental health of menopausal
women because we're struggling and so
the first thing you have to know is that
after 40 our sex hormones start to
decline so estrogen goes up and down so
one day you're going to experience if
you have if you live with a 43y old
woman you're going to experience she's
great next day you're going to be like
who are you that's because her estrogen
is on a roller coaster ride so that's
the first thing to know second thing is
that progesterone is plummeting after 40
they actually say now at 35 progesterone
is starting to go down so as
progesterone goes down we are less
stress resilient so little things are
going to irritate us like they've never
irritated us before and you might be the
recipient of that so if you find we're
very triggerable it's because we're
losing progesterone so we need to we
just need to have more breaks we need
more nurturing like I explained in the
menstrual cycle we need to have more
love brought our way because we just
can't handle stress the same way and
then as as ultimately estrogen finally
goes into a place where she's
non-existent once a woman doesn't have
her cycle we can't hold on to
information the way the same way we used
to be able to we forget things and it's
really frustrating to us and so when
people around us like I went through
this with my team when I was trying to
get my menopausal hormones in check they
would say well you already told us that
yes you reminded us of that and I
started finding I was repeating myself
and then I realized oh I'm at a new
level of low of estrogen and then I
worked you know getting a working with
some bio identicals working with some
lifestyle to bring my estrogen up but
from 40 till about
55 that is about a 10 to 15 year period
where the woman's brain has to
recalibrate to these loss of hormones
and so our moods are all over the place
during that time so understanding where
we're at having more compassion for us
not taking us on um and just helping us
understand ourselves which is largely
what I'm trying to do through my books
is will be so helpful but we don't even
understand our own selves menopausal
moods are are treacherous it's an
extreme
sport it literally is an extreme sport
it's brutal what about off the 45 she
said 40 to 45 yeah so once we actually
go a whole year without a period we
actually do better so the brain is used
to the less hormones so when we get on
the other side
postmenopausal we actually are great uh
we're women that once they go to that
side of the hormonal process tend to
actually be you know we have so much
wisdom I'd like to think um we actually
tend to be the opposite of everything I
just said we tend to be more stress uh
we can handle stress better we tend to
be more gregarious our libido goes back
up our as our brain starts to
recalibrate we become a better version
of ourselves and it's that first phase
that 40 to 45 phase what's that phase
called is that the that's per menopause
per menopause and then menopause is
beyond 45 yeah the average age for
menopause right now is about 52 although
a lot of women are going in around 45
sometimes
earlier okay but but I think that if
there was one thing I want want I could
help the world understand is that we're
trying to understand ourselves during
that time so be patient with us because
we may not we may react much different
than you've ever seen us react
before so we have to get to know
ourselves from a new lens that's the
gift that menopause actually gives us
and if you allow us to do that when we
make it through to the postmenopausal
years you're going to have a beautiful
wise wonderful woman on the other side
of that it's just that transition into
per menopause is really a a treacherous
one it's so interesting it's so I find
it agreeing that no one told me this at
any point in my life agreed um because
irrespective of whether you are a woman
or not and you're going to go through
that you're going to um your
relationships with women are going to be
integral to your life unavoidably your
mother your grandmother your partner so
having the Insight gives me the empathy
I love it you know and that's what
that's why I'm so fortunate from having
this conversation it was Gabby Logan who
came on this podcast de mcco who wrote a
book about menopause in the end and knew
that I've really helped to open my eyes
about that and um it's interesting I
just I don't know what it is I think
growing up like men just don't want to
talk about periods and menstrual cycles
and all of these kinds of things they're
almost Taboo in a weird way I call it in
the new book I'm writing I'm calling it
the cultural hush yeah I think we have a
cultural hush around the menstrual cycle
around menopause I can't tell you the
number of men since fast like a girl
that has come out that read that book
and they go to the chapter on women and
hormones and then they come and find me
and say I finally understand my wife
yeah I finally understand my daughter
well why aren't we talking about that
and then how many women we don't we
don't talk about like the fact that I'm
I'm suffering because I don't have as
much estro estrogen it it would we don't
have a culture or a society that allows
us to talk like that and that's what I
think is is Shifting right now so many
menopause books are coming out big
people you know Oprah is starting to do
a whole thing on menopause like the
conversation's opening up but it's going
to take bravery from women to step up I
mean I'm a very very capable woman who
has a beautiful family and a great
business it's really hard for me to say
I can't do one more zoom call my brain
can't do it that feels like
failure and then we have the other side
of this which is we have the men that
are like why are you being a [__] today
it's like because I don't have the
hormone to stop me from being a [__]
today so those those kind of
conversations are not hand happening but
if we did it with more empathy if we
could express ourself like hey I just
need to I need a break right now is just
a lot on my hormones give me 30 minutes
give me an hour I can come back and be a
better version I just need to take care
of myself now someone's going to be
listening to this and they're going to
think H it's not a problem you can just
go get the hormones you can just go get
some
HRT it's called HRT right HRT yeah you
can go get some HRT throw that at the
problem then you'll have your hormones
back yeah so this is this is the big
thing is that just because you take a
hormone doesn't mean your cells are
going to use it so if you take let's use
let's use uh thyroids a perfect example
because so many women specifically take
thyroid medication and they don't see
any any any change in their thyroid
symptoms it's called an exogenous
hormone you bring it into your body the
body registers that it's there the gut
and the have to still break that hormone
down into a usable form so if your gut
is off or your liver is overloaded
you're not going to break that hormone
down once that hormone's broken down the
cell has to be able to receive it if
that cell is inflamed with a lot of
toxic oils and endocrine disruptors
there's no way to get the hormone into
the cell so there are three very pivotal
pieces you got to there has to be
production of the hormone there has to
be breaking down of the hormone and
there has to be receiving of the hormone
so when you take HRT you're only
handling one of those things you still
and lifestyle this is why I'm such a so
passionate about lifestyle lifestyle can
handle the other two they can take care
of the gut and the liver they can open
up the cell so it can receive HRT I I've
been uh I wrote a book called The
menopause reset and it'll come out in
we're reissuing it in uh June and one of
the things in there is I I mapped out
five lifestyle changes that women should
do after 40 and in that book I lived
that I did that through my whole 40s I
didn't start doing bioidenticals till
like 52 but I had my lifestyle dialed in
first and now bioidenticals are working
well people are sat there going five
Lifestyle Changes they want to know what
they are they're gonna they're going to
buy the book as well aren't we we're
gonna buy the book and we're going to
find out right now yes okay well what do
you think the first one is fasting yes
there you go the first one's fasting
uh so and and actually fast like a girl
came after the menopause reset because
all the women asked me well what if I
have a site you know what if I'm in my
30s what if I'm in my 20s how should I
fast so that's you know that was sort of
the birth of that book so fasting second
one is you have to learn to cycle your
food so you ketogenic diet works really
well at certain times cycle your food
cycle your food Styles what does that
mean so if in the front half if you have
a menstrual cycle yeah in the front half
when estrogen's coming in go keto keep
carbs low keep glucose low you're great
back half of your cycle when
progesterone's coming in raise glucose
so don't go keto but do Nature's carbs
do more fruits do more squashes potatoes
that's going to help with building
progesterone so the per menopausal woman
has to learn that there's times to bring
carbs down and there's times to bring
carbs up and that's what I explain in
that I called it keto variations in that
book so that's step two step three
microbiome you got to pay attention to
your microbiome too many women have been
on birth control for decades they go
screaming into their per menopausal
years and their microbiomes and is
completely off we have a whole set of
bacteria in our gut called the
estrobolome which is the bacteria that
break estrogen down so you need to be
eating more leafy green vegetables more
nuts and seeds olives chocolate even is
great for the microbiome so I list all
those Foods out in there and then number
go ahead and that's for stage two of the
three steps to act these hormone
replacement therapy is actually working
which is being able to metabolize the
hormone break it down yes you got it
okay step four you got it you're going
to be a hormone expert after this well
you know not just a pretty face yeah so
then the fourth one is watch your toxic
load so we talked about that and then
step five is my favorite um and it's
stop being a rushing woman yeah I know
as I tell you from a rushing
lifestyle we need more as we go through
per menopause we need more more downtime
you got to schedule more downtime you
need to let that nervous system come
down you can't go through your par
menopausal years and Thrive if you are
go go go all the time it will catch up
with you and so you've got to bring in
more mindfulness more meditation more
yoga more more vacations more nose
that's got to be a part of your
repertoire you might have gotten away
with it at 35 but you won't get away
with it at
45 I was thinking then as you speaking I
was thinking about how I kind of
summarize all of these points into how
we should be living Our Lives as men and
women because obviously we've got
dragged into a consumerist
workaholic sugar overloaded toxin ridden
life because of because we've been
unconscious yeah you know so we that's
the way that cor corporations
and media narrative and social media
algorithms have taken us so I was
thinking if we could just pause for a
second and we could rewrite the
blueprint of what it is to be a human
and how to
live let's try and rewrite that so how
would I work as a man and a woman what
would be the the differences how many
days a week what if you if you were in
charge now of rewriting that which you
might be one day I'd like to be you'd
like to be okay so you're taking on the
responsibility so how would men and
women work and and you mean from a
business yeah like a professional
standpoint okay well let's start with a
man yeah so well both men and women we
have two nervous systems one that speeds
us up one that relax that slows us down
so you could be in a speed up mode most
of the time I would say you just need to
make sure I mean it really actually I
just thought about this right now the
the patriarchal Work Week works really
well for men Monday through F Friday
work your fanny off Saturday and Sunday
take it off now you're you're moving in
and out of your parasympathetic and
sympathetic nervous system and you're
giving both of them a break you are not
meant to be working 247 seven days a
week you know like you're not meant to
be working all the time and and never
taking a break what would you make the
work hours for a man well I'm I'm a big
fan of working in the daylight and
resting we're supposed to rest when it's
dark okay so winter you would work less
summer you would work more
okay we do the opposite right we take
more vacation in the summer women so
women we would design our whole work
week around our menstrual cycle so we
could go Full Tilt all the way till day
19 day 20 and then we would we would
take a week off and we would bow out so
instead of doing it in a weekly amount
like you guys would be doing we'd be
doing it in a monthly amount and how
long would you bow out for well ideally
it depends on each woman's going to be a
little different but I would say
anywhere from I want to say seven days
if it worked for a schedule until you
bleed so day 20 till you know if you're
if day 21 till day 28 you would do it
for a week bowing out might also look
like I just am not going to take on the
the high load that I normally do the
rest of the month maybe I'll cut it in
half mhm maybe work from home or yeah
yeah maybe I work from home maybe I
can't do my workload and my extreme
exercise and go socialize with my
friends during that week I just need to
start to slow everything down so that's
what I I want to say about bowing out is
that it's just you're putting yourself
first and you're slowing everything down
now eating men and women eating yeah so
men um I think as far as food I agree
with just keeping blood sugar stable is
great I think you guys really work well
off of a meat based an animal uh diet I
don't think you have more you have more
testosterone which means you have more
muscle we the way that we build muscle
and keep muscle strong is through amino
acids and you get that in meat so for
men I feel like that Primal diet the
paleo diet was meat and vegetables and
fruit is amazing I think that's that's
perfect I don't think refined flowers
and sugars um that we get are exposed to
I think that over in an overabundance
they'll hurt men too and we're seeing
that with metabolic syndrome women we do
well with Meats I you know um I think we
need less of it because we have less
testosterone so we may need less of it
although it is important protein is
important especially as we age so I
don't want to lose sight on that um but
we also need to bring glucose up so we
need more fruits we're going to need
more squashes we're going to need more
potatoes and that's you know all built
around your menstrual cycle so eating
times uh I'm I'm not a fan of eating
when it's dark out because when me
melatonin goes up insulin you become
more insulin resistant so I'm a fan of
which means what it means you so your
your body won't process the glucose from
that meal as efficiently when it's dark
out it won't take it away and store it
or it needs to be stor as energy exactly
it will store it as fat or something or
uh yeah it's going to store it as fat if
it can't if insulin can't drive it into
the cell for energy it'll stored as fat
so the meal you eat at 9:30 is going to
be stored more as fat than if you have
that same meal at
5:30 I know so night eers aren't doing
themselves any favors no so we go back
to our Primal friends right like let's
go back and use that if if if people get
lost in these theories so they didn't
have electricity they sat around the
fire so most likely they ate during
light hours and then the women what did
the women do if we go back and look at
at cultures around our period we were
actually that's the whole Red Tent ideas
we were SE sequestered off into another
part of the of the tribe we didn't have
to do as many chores we went more into
an introverted place if you go back and
you study what we did in those days it
was very much along those lines and
we're just not doing that now what about
supplements what supplements would you
have men and women
consuming uh well for women the most
important supplement she could ever take
is magnesium magnesium makes every
single hormone in your body for men I
would say the most important supplement
I mean there's a lot of them um but for
hormones zinc because zinc makes
testosterone outside of that for both
men and women the other supplement and
the other measurement that we all need
to be looking at are vitamin D levels
yeah I've learned this from guest on
this podcast I've started taking Vitamin
D supplements yeah if your vitamin D is
under 30 you are in a a critically uh
depressed immune State uh so you got to
get it definitely over 30 for hormonal
Health we need to see it more up in
about 60 70 to have your hormones be
working at their best so this this goes
back to like the HRT thing if all if
we're taking HRT but our vitamin D is 20
that HRT isn't going to be as effective
as as compared to the woman who has an
HRT of like 55 or 60 or a vitamin D of
55 or 60 that HRT will work better
interesting and and vitamin D comes from
sunlight doesn't it sunlight and uh
sardines sardines it's the food sources
are really bad this is why everybody's
low in it the food sources are it's
sardines it's like really fatty fishes
um and sunlight and we spend most of our
time indoors that's right we can't get
it from this kind of light right no no
and you have to be outside with your
like skin exposed at the high point of
the day of the sun like 12 12
1:00 to get the most vitamin D and if
you're in air a city where there's more
air pollution study has shown that that
you're not going to the Rays that come
in that turn you uh that will hit your
skin and turn it into Vitamin D are less
because air pollution blocks it which is
why so many people are low in vitamin D
which is why taking vitamin D is a smart
thing is that why people are doing these
like infrared saas and stuff now does
that produce vitamin D or is that
something else that's more detox oh
detox it's pushing infrared it what it
does is it uh simulates a fever so it
burns things out from the inside of the
cell out which is why it's a really good
detoxer there was a few things you said
when I was watching some of your YouTube
videos that I wrote down that I found
really compelling one of them was you
said about the importance of opening up
our our detox Pathways and you just
mentioned detoxing there what do you
mean by opening up our detox Pathways
yeah so if you look at our lymph system
each the lymph is is like you know
people know lymph nodes because when you
get sick you can feel them Ms you get
yeah yeah so the lymph is always
carrying toxins out of organs so Li the
liver has a lymph pathway the gut has
lymph nodes in there that are going to
pull all the toxins that are in there
and move them out of you so we need to
keep these lymph Pathways open so the
gut the gut's a great one you should be
having a bowel movement every single day
if you're not having a bowel movement
every single day then the what's what
the body's trying to get rid of stain
inside of you and it gets congested um a
thing we teach women about the armpit
and and actually would work for men too
is that you're you should have a pit not
a puff what do that mean if it's a puff
like look in the mirror and if your
armpit is a puff then that's stagnant
lymph it means that you're not pulling
the the toxins for women that are coming
out of her breast are not getting out
toxins that are coming out from the head
down into the uh into the thoracic area
is not getting out because it's
congested so your underarm is Puffy and
not like a pit yeah then you might be
storing some of those toxins that's
right and they're not moving they're not
mobilizing why aren't they am I blocking
my Pathways yeah the pathways blocked so
with what well there's the question you
with I feel like people are going to
leave this podcast to be so depressed
because there's so many pieces of this
but uh deodorant deodorant clogs that up
and so it doesn't mobilize all of the
toxins out this was a big big thing with
breast cancer is a lot of women using
toxic deodorants they weren't getting
the toxins out of the breast and it was
clogging in the armpit because of the
toxins from the
deodorant that explains why we sweat in
that area right yeah because it's a
pathway why do we even have hair in that
area I don't know you tell me it's a
detox it's for detoxing it's to help get
those toxins out oh so the molecules go
down the hair yeah yeah and what do
women do shave it off that's right so
you're saying
I I I shave I I'm I just because I don't
I can't walk it's just not in my in my
nature but I you know what I do is I
have a loofah in my shower and I just
loofah under my arms at whenever I
shower to open up those Pathways what's
a lofa it's like a little organic sponge
ah okay it scrubs it yeah scrubs it we
also have pubic hair we also have pubic
hair we are getting toxins out from the
ovaries the ovaries are the major area
for and testes this is where hormones
are being produced and so as they're
coming out they are supposed to
influence our everything biologically we
need them to influence but then they're
also supposed to get out of our system
and so the hair ends up becoming like
this way that we can mobilize the toxins
out of us I never want I never knew or
asked why I grow hair under my arms and
in the pubic region no one ever told me
about that no one ever I never
questioned it I thought it was slightly
inconvenience yes well it is for sure
but the body doesn't do anything to
inconvenience you it does it to increase
your chances of survival because I'm the
byproduct of millions of years of
survival of the fittest and evolution
that has made me pruned a sculpted to
survive it's funny because we spend so
much of our time and this goes back to
the conversation around sugar we spend
and just weight loss and all these
things we live in a world where we think
that our body is against us right it's
fighting us it's it's making me go for
the sugar drawer it's stopping me losing
weight it's growing all these pubes
right inconvenient yeah yeah yeah yeah
and then we fight it we shave it off and
we you know do all these crazy things to
fight against our body but our body is
very much it's it's
actually it's actually for us and many
of the things we're choosing to do are
against us we are against ourselves not
our bodies our bodies cannot put her
foot wrong you got it I mean you got it
it's this is what I'm trying to bring
back is this this respect for what the
body's trying to do that's what we're
missing we we it's all
inconvenient and it's everything from
like even like weight gain like why is
your body gaining weight because it's so
brilliant that it decided not to put
that fat around your organs it put it
around your belly and now you're looking
in the mirror and you're villainizing it
but your body was trying to save your
life in that moment like everything the
body is always doing for you not against
you but we
continually discredit what it's trying
to do and manipulate it which is why the
best thing I can think of is that we're
just in an evolutionary
mismatch we're just at the modern world
does not line up with the human body's
design quick one as you guys know we're
lucky enough to have blue jeans by
Verizon as a sponsor of this podcast and
for anyone that doesn't know blue jeans
is an online video conferencing tool
that allows you to have slick fast high
quality online meetings without all the
glitches you might normally find with
online meeting tools and they have a new
feature called Blue Jeans basic blue
jeans basic is essentially a free
version of their top quality video
conferencing toour that means you get an
immersive video experience that is super
high quality super easy and super
basically zero fast apart from all the
incredible features like zero time
limits on meeting calls it also comes
with High Fidelity audio and video
including Dolby voice which is
incredibly useful they also have
Enterprise grade security so you can
collaborate with confidence it's so
smooth that it's quite literally
changing the game for myself and my team
without compromising on quality to find
out more all you have to do is search
blue jeans.com and let me know how you
get on my girlfriend came upstairs
yesterday when I was having a shower and
she said to me that she tried the hu
protein shake which lives on my fridge
over there and she said it's amazing low
calories you get your 20 odd grams of
protein you get your 26 vitamins and
minerals and it's nutritionally complete
in the protein space there's lots of
things but it's hard to find something
that is nice especially when consumed
just with water and that is
nutritionally complete and that has
about 100 calories in total while also
giving you your 20 grams of protein if
you haven't tried the heal protein
product do give it a try The Salted
Caramel one if you put some ice cubes in
it and you put it in a blender and you
try it is as good as pretty much any
milkshake on the market just mixed with
water it's been a game Cher for me
because I'm trying to drop my calorie
intake and I'm trying to be a little
more healthy with my diet so this is
where heel fits in my life thank you H
for making a product that I actually
like The Salted Caramel is my favorite
I've got the banana one here which is
the one my girlfriend likes but for me
salted caramel is the one something
really pissed me off this weekend I was
walking through um New York City and I
saw a poster and it is for inject weight
loss injections yeah have you seen this
this no but OIC is a is a drug that's
really popular right now there's a
couple of drugs right now there's
there's one my friends were talking
about it and we were like there's a
diabetes drug I think and the headlines
have been that so many people are taking
this yeah diabetes drug to lose weight
that people with diabetes are struggling
um there's another one called
semaglutide yep yep this is this is
people injecting things in their body to
help them lose weight Y and the poster
which my friend had sent me and i' I'd
seen it earlier and then he' sent me the
poster as well in our group chat says
one shot a week lose weight and it has
the little URL someone thankfully had
actually ripped the URL off this
billboard um what's your take on all
this stuff yeah the the the new
medications that are out there right now
are creating a weight loss uh
possibility when we look at the scale
and when we look at how people feel when
they put on their clothes but it's at
the expense of muscle they're actually
losing more muscle than they are losing
fat so yes you feel thinner but it's not
because you lost fat you lost muscle
muscle is the organ of Longevity if you
lose muscle as you age you are going to
be in a bad situation I mean we need
muscle to get out of a chair yeah you
need muscle to perform daily life
functions the other thing people don't
realize about muscle is in muscle or
insulin re re uh receptors so if you
lose muscle you don't have as many
insulin receptors which means you're now
putting yourself in a insulin resistant
state which means you have to stay on
the medication forever to be able to
stay at the weight you want because you
don't have the same insulin sensitivity
so again we're it's like the calorie in
calorie out short-term result long-term
consequence it's not it's risky it's
risky and then you know every medication
has a side effect but I'm more concerned
about the person who thinks they solved
their weight loss issue and all they've
done is made it worse down the
road I here with many a health expert
and a fitness expert and nutritional
experts and they all agree with what you
just said about muscle they all said to
me cuz I asked a question to I think it
was Tim Spectre about might have been
jles yo asked a question about do does
our metabolism fall off a cliff as we
age which is quite a popular thing and a
few of them said the same thing to me
they go it at a certain point further
down the line metabolism does change but
really the thing that changed is muscle
mass and that means that we stop moving
as much which means that we gain weight
faster so he said the number one thing
that you need to do as you age is keep
doing resistance training keep your
muscle and because I was asking him a
question about my father I said I went
down this really St steep cliff in
barley a couple of weekends before and
as I was going down those stairs I was
thinking my dad couldn't do this anymore
and at the bottom of those stairs was
our activity for the day we were going
white water rafting and as I was walking
down those stairs I was thinking I want
to be my dad's age and be able to go
down these stairs so I can do stuff with
my kids um and getting into a place
where I'm a mobile
at you know in my by 60 that is a choice
that is an unavoid that is a for most of
us that is a choice and it's one that we
can avoid if we keep muscle and we keep
therefore we'll keep fat and what youve
said there from what I garnered from it
is I will actually if I take those
chemicals and if I inject them into my
body I'll lose my muscle mass and if I
lose my muscle mass I will be I will
have a higher chance of weight gain and
obesity when I'm
older and the and your functionality
yeah so the great the perfect example
that I always stuck in my head is my dad
had a knee surgery and he's 86 years old
and I remember trying to help him get
around a chair that he was sitting in
and he was starting to lose his upper
body strength and he literally couldn't
push himself up and out of the chair to
be able to move into a comfortable
position and I thought oh my gosh that's
where muscle is so important at 86 years
old is just being able to get up and out
of a chair after after recovering from a
surgery
but if you think about the functionality
of a human as we age if you want to be
able to not do as many activities like
you're talking about just make sure you
don't have as much muscle like the
minute muscle goes away your
functionality goes away but more
importantly the minute muscle goes away
you're more insulin resistant so you're
going to gain weight more Down The Long
Haul a lot of other people would say you
know the way to lose weight is just to
do lots of cardio run a lot yeah good
idea
no no so here's another interesting
thing and I'm going to give it through a
women's perspective because we're let's
go back to women over 40 so cortisol
goes up with extra cardio uh calorie set
point goes you know you're more calorie
output so remember that's also happening
and you're changing your set point so I
need more calories my calorie set point
goes up and my cortisol levels go up y
okay okay so what ends up happening
is that you actually now are tanking all
your other hormones so let's follow the
trail of progesterone cortisol goes up
because you're you're doing so much
cardio so progesterone goes down because
Carol goes up progesterone goes down
well progesterone keeps estrogen in
check so now estrogen can go up and if
you have too much estrogen eventually
what's going to happen is it's going to
be stored as fat so that extra hormone
will so long term that's not a great
plan for women for women for men uh well
so then the second piece applies to both
men and women is if you're doing a lot
of cardio most likely you're breaking
down muscle to be able to perform that
cardio and a great example is look at a
marathon runner versus a tennis player
you know or a soccer player like even
though soccer players are doing a lot of
cardio it's a lot of start stop start
stop but a marathon one Runner who's
done so much cardio is breaking muscle
down to be able to do that amount of
cardio so
it's okay to do just not at the expense
of muscle and for a women you can't do
it at the expense of
progesterone
so it won't help me to lose weight doing
cardio no you know what's going to help
you to lose weight is more weightlifting
build more muscles you have more insulin
receptor sites fast more so you can get
rid of all of the glucose that gets
stored in muscles break your fast with
protein and yeah I mean that's what we
saw we see all all the time in both my
clinic and my online world is those
three things will get you in the shape
that you want it might not remember as
you build muscle you're not going to
lose the the the number on the scale
might be that much different you know it
might it might not move but your whole
shape is going to change you're going to
look different so is any level of cardio
good for weight loss would you recommend
that just for the the broader health
benefits I you know I think cardio is
more of a mental health Improvement
improve you know you get all those
endorphins it's so good for your mental
health I love to go running it's my
favorite thing but I do it for my mental
health not to lose
weight another thing that I saw online
which was very curious that you said is
you were talking about how to undo the
oxidative damage from eating too much
sugar yeah what do you mean by that so
think about think about the cell as an
ecosystem right and so inside the cell
there has to be a balance of all the
right components so when glucose goes up
which happens when you eat too much
sugar that balance goes off and one of
the byproducts of that is that your body
puts off these free radicals it creates
more oxidative damage within the cell
the more of that oxidative damage the
more it's going to destroy mitochondria
and the and the nucleus and all the
cellular parts so what you're doing when
you're fasting is you're reestablishing
balance into the cell and you're
allowing to your body to naturally un do
the oxidative damage that happened from
poor living got you so it's like a reset
on it's like a cellular reset people say
that there's been a school of thought
that fasting breaks down muscle that
I'll lose muscle if I fast true or false
so it appears to break down muscle you
it depends on how long you're in a fast
but it will appear as if your muscle is
shrinking because it's getting rid of
the stored sugar but when you now bring
in a high protein meal and feed it amino
acids it will grow stronger you'll see
more definition because it it broke the
sugar down which you don't want in
there so it changes the the shape of the
muscle makes it more lean I guess it
makes it more lean but if you follow
that up with good eating you're going to
make yourself stronger now the person
who decides to go into a fast breaks
down muscle and doesn't follow up with
good eating yeah you're going to end up
with less muscle but if you follow it up
with a lot of protein and you build that
Emptor back up now you're actually able
to build your muscle even stronger
there's two ways to build muscle one is
through weights lifting weights strength
training and the other is through food
protein so all fasting is doing is
leaning it out and does fasting have an
impact
on my
sleep uh it it can in a couple ways um
sleep for starters if your brain's
inflamed you're not going to sleep so
fasting brings down inflammation so that
would be the first thing um the other
thing is that a lot of people wake up
especially women 2 3: in the morning and
they kind of get the jolt out of out of
bed and a lot of times that's because
you've maybe had dinner at 7 o'clock
glucose is going down and so the body
registers that glucose has gone down and
so it gives you a cortisol Spike and all
of a sudden you wake up at 2 or 3 in the
morning is that why some people wake up
at I've got a friend of mine that's um
an elderly male and he always tells me
goes oh I woke up at 3: a.m. last night
and he's constantly saying it he's like
I woke up in the middle of the night
again last night yep and I've always
wondered why and we when I'm with him we
do eat dinner particularly late yeah
yeah so he's probably getting so he has
all that glucose he go he goes to sleep
and now the glucose starts to go down
and then there's going to be a point at
which the body registers that it hits a
new low and then it triggers it and and
all of a sudden triggers uh cortisol and
releases glucose from other body parts
and the the body takes that as we're
running from a tiger get up out bed ah
so it wakes you up yeah and to avoid
that what would you do you'd recommend
not eating so late yeah not eating so
late but the more you fast the more
you're you stabilize that blood sugar
and you don't have those highs and lows
as much it's it's a com it's a way of
bringing balance back to the whole blood
sugar system I have to say you know we
talk a lot about I mean we've talked
extensively about fasting today and one
of the concerns I have about talking
about the subject matter is the
implications it has for people with
eating disorders
y um because it's quite easy to conflate
messages if if you're not able to fully
understand the context of everything and
I'm sure that's a topic you've you've
thought about I mean you I think you
actually write about it in one of the
the later chapters in your book in
chapter 10 yep
um it's a it's it's a common it's it's
one that we thought a lot about when we
wrote the book so I I I want to say that
first that um when the book was put
together that was definitely something
my agent the publisher everybody was
really keen on how can we tread that
lightly and here's my stance on it the
first is that if you have a severe
eating disorder I'm going to recommend
that if you want to learn to fast you
need to bring your therapist into it you
need to bring your doctor into it you
need another set of eyes to help you
navigate that so that would be the first
thing that I would say um second thing
I'm going to go back to this woman that
I worked with who had severe eating
disorders and and she's been um very
very public about her eating disorders
and I didn't start with fasting I
started with food with her so we started
by stabilizing her blood sugar first and
then once I saw that those spikes on her
glucose monitor were were in a place I
wanted were more steady then I
introduced fasting because she was
seeing food as a real healing tool and
then I could put patch on fasting as a
as an adjunct to it and she's doing
incredible incredible so you it's
there's just a different approach but I
really encourage that you work with your
practitioner or your
therapist where do I start I'm sold you
sold me on fasting I'm going to become a
faster where do I start Mindy so the
first place to start is you want to
think about compressing your food into
one eating window so let me start by
asking you what time do you typically
finish eating dinner
I told you this off camera and I told
you not to mention it sorry sorry okay
on a on a good
day on an Ideal day so my my issue is um
I'm going to be honest because that's
the point of this podcast um the issue I
have is I wake up in the morning I then
Begin work and I'll get I'll eat my
first meal this is quite shocking in
fact I'll eat my first meal
around I'm going to say between 2:00
p.m. and
400 p.m. depending on how busy my
schedule is sometimes there's been days
I remember one particular day it's
actually when I found out that I do this
I took someone with me for the day they
were shado me for the day and it got to
7: p.m. and they go we haven't eaten
today oh wow and I didn't notice I had
no idea that I hadn't eaten that day so
I'm a very late eater but then the issue
is I will go to the gym usually in the
evening usually after work often between
900 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. and then when I
get home from the gym oh no this is I go
to sleep like a good boy no I this is
where you go WR this is it yeah this is
where it goes downhill then I'll eat
then I'll eat something um pretty late
at night and that could be midnight so
you're so what I heard in that is your
eating window is 2 to 12 2 to 12 yeah so
that you're in a you're in a 10hour
eating window yeah so in in if you in
the morning are you doing coffee yeah
yeah I do now mainly because of this
podcast but okay yeah but you're not
eating anything else in the morning no
not really no on on no I don't eat
breakfast there's no days in my life
where I eat breakfast really um the
earliest I might eat is midday okay so
if you choose to make two your time that
you I call it opening up your eating
window you're going to start eating so
you would go 2 to 12 that's 10 hour
eating window it's not and we'll we'll
work on your window here in a moment
that that's leaving 14 hours of fasting
um about 15 18 hours you're going to
start to get the testosterone increase
so I would say let's can we make it a
nine or an even an eight hour eating
window especially because you told me
your goals and and your fitness goals I
would think for you an eight- hour
eating window would be great so you have
an option you can either not eat when
you get home from the gym and now we're
at I'm just so hungry right or you could
push it back to three before or four you
said sometimes where you don't where you
don't eat what would be
ideal um well for you definitely just
don't want to eat when it's dark out so
ideal would be an8 hour eating window
finishing right now at summer so
finishing at 9: and then you would work
back yeah so you would do like 1 to
9 or 12 to 8 or 12 to 8 yeah or 11 till
7: right it's not going to happen I'll
do I'll do the uh the one till 9 that
you said yeah cuz I go to the gym often
quite late in the UK so that means I can
after the gym and then here's here's a
little hack is that and and I want to
make sure that people don't lose sight
what I just did with you is customize it
to your lifestyle and I think that's
really important you just take that
eating window and you figure out what's
the best where it fits for you um I I do
this with people who have families they
want to sit down and eat dinner so don't
skip dinner with your kids like sit and
enjoy that you sound like that that from
a fitness and work level that's working
for you so let's let's let's keep it
like that let's not move that around too
much but for your fitness goals one day
a week I'd like to see you elongate your
fast push your fast like could you go 20
hours 24 hours of fasting where you're
just having one meal a day because what
you're going to do is you're going to
put your body into a little bit of a
state of stress where it all the things
we've talked about are going to start to
the healing is going to happen at a much
quicker R you're saying once in a while
yes I once a week for you once a week so
once a week go like 24 hours not eating
that's right or what we call it one meal
a day wow okay anything else I need to
know to get
started um I mean coffee can be your
friend um uh putting MCT oil in it can
help you get ketones a little bit
quicker um so I don't know if you ever
put oil in your coffee but I have MCT
oil on my counter at home because I did
the keto diet yeah so just put it in
your coffee it'll switch you over and
it'll get those ketones going a little
quicker um there is something I wrote
about in the book called a fasted snack
and the fasted snack is pure fat bomb um
they're hard to find I'll it's a fat
bomb so it's it has no carbs very little
protein it's all fat so an example of
one might be an avocado is pretty fat
dense it has it does have some carbs uh
but the one I love it's something called
a keto cup and it's MCT oil with cacao
butter and some chocolate just pure
chocolate around wrapped around it it
looks like a little rees's peanut butter
cups and I you can do those in your
fasting window and they'll keep they
they won't switch you over because
they're pure fat oh so fasted snacks can
be really helpful the research shows
that you get all the benefits of fasting
but you're popping these little keto
cups in your mouth all day long what is
the most important thing we haven't
talked about in your
[Music]
view I you know I think the most
important thing is for people to realize
that there's not the perfect path
there's just your path so take all
everything we talked about and find the
threads that resonate with you and put
those into action and then maybe you
come back and listen to the podcast
again and you take another thread but we
have to stop trying to do our diet like
everybody else around us there's your
diet and that's really what I'm trying
to get is that people build a lifestyle
that's unique to them n of one be your
own n of n of one if it's really the
most beautiful place to
live n of one yeah you know they say in
a in a study they always say like the N
is how many people were in the study and
so they'll say like n of a hundred n of
a thousand so n of one is one person was
in the study be your own study be your
own be your own study your own
experiment yeah we have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest asks a question for the next guest
and the question that's been left in the
Diary of a CEO for you is
interesting uh oh it's it's actually not
that profound or interesting but but
it's I feel
like you're the type of person that will
interpret a deeper meaning than this
question maybe is alluding to
but really think about this
okay how do you take care of
you that's actually that's a great
question
um I could answer that question on a
health level like I I have a really
strong Health routine um I get up in the
morning I meditate I have a hyperbaric
oxygen chamber at home I pop in my
chamber um I read like I the first two
hours of my day are for me first before
anybody else so I have that part of me
but I want to give a a a deeper answer
to that
um I'm really getting to know myself and
what my needs are especially as a 53y
old woman who's moving through menopause
and really honoring
that how I care for myself is more
important than anything else and what I
mean by that is when I say no to things
not overscheduling myself uh putting my
needs before everybody else's these are
things I haven't done in my life and
right now I'm really working on caring
for myself first so that I can pour love
into the world after that love me first
why is that
important I think for me I have been in
the healing profession for so long I've
been a mother a wife and I've done
everything for everybody else and I
stand here at 53 saying I'm going to
start doing things for me now and that
feels that feels like selflove and that
feels like where health is going to live
for me and um I haven't I haven't spent
much time doing that in my life so I'm
learning to do it for the first time
now Mindy Dr Mindy pels that is
beautiful thank you so much thank you so
much for your wisdom um your remarkable
engaging captivating Storyteller author
content creator and a wonderful
practitioner everything you do you've
helped so many people with your work
work and I'm I was so excited when they
told me I'd be have the honor of having
a conversation with you today this is
one of those conversations that
genuinely will change people's lives and
isn't that an amazing thing it's really
cool yeah isn't that an amazing thing
that we can sit here and all the stuff
you've shared will have a significant
impact on one person's life millions of
people's lives hundreds of thousands of
people's lives which will mean that they
live a more fulfilled existence they can
kiss their and hug their kids for longer
and that is because of the work you do
so on behalf of all those people who may
never get to meet you in person and
thank you themselves thank you oh thank
you I I just really appreciate the
opportunity to be here for the
thoughtful questions and really allowing
me to express what I I hope hope does
exactly that and I think the purpose of
of living a fulfilled life is touching
humans you never actually
meet
amen quick one some of you will know
that this podcast is now sponsored by
the incredible Airbnb I'm a huge user
lover and and customer of Airbnb every
time I go away on a trip whether that's
work related or it's a holiday Airbnb is
always my go-to but have you ever
considered have you ever thought about
making some extra cash to cover some
bills or to help pay off a holiday let
me explain further perhaps people are
coming to your town or city for a music
festival for an event or a holiday and
you have a spare room why not Airbnb it
or your home office is free right now
you're working away from home during the
week you could Airbnb it honestly the
possibilities are endless I've Airbnb
one of my Apartments before and it's a
great way to make extra cash I'd highly
recommend you all to at least check it
out that extra space you have that extra
room it might be worth more than you
think so to find out just how much it's
worth search
airbnb.co host that's airbnb.co /host
[Music]
ah